In my therapy work with abused individuals
there was always huge variation
in the emotions experienced by different clients.
Some felt explosive rage.
For others, anger was nonexistent.
Some clients looked back on their abusive
relationships with overwhelming grief.
Others viewed them with cold detachment.
But one emotion was present in
some form in virtually every case.
Common as it was, the nature of the emotion itself
made it one of the most difficult to discuss.
And some individuals worked
hard to avoid the subject.
Shame.
I want to explore some questions
about this potent emotion.
What are the effects of shame?
What kinds of environments encourage shame?
Is the practice of shaming
individuals a force for social good?
How do shame-bound individuals— who’ve
become immersed in malignant shame —
overcome their self-loathing?
Shame is broadly defined
as an uncomfortable feeling
caused by an awareness of
some personal shortcoming.
On the surface, it would seem
like a useful, healthy emotion
conducive to positive social interactions.
After all, feeling some discomfort
about our transgressions
can motivate us to do better.
So what’s the problem?
To understand the special impact of shame
it can be instructive to look
at a closely related emotion.
June Tangney and Jessica Tracy
explored the relationship
between shame and guilt
two members of a group of self-conscious emotions
that also includes pride and embarrassment.
They note that shame and guilt
are frequently mentioned together
and characterised as moral
emotions that inhibit behaviour
considered to be antisocial
or morally objectionable.
In reality, things aren’t so straightforward.
Shame and guilt have some fundamental differences
that generate very different motivations.
For Tangney and Tracy, it was psychologist
Helen Block Lewis who captured the distinction.
According to Lewis, guilt
involves a negative evaluation
of a specific act or behaviour
whereas shame goes deeper, involving
a negative evaluation of the self.
The person is seen as having a defective,
inadequate, even corrupt nature.
This difference in focus has
a big impact on our responses.
Tangney and colleagues present
a wealth of empirical research
showing how targeting the
person rather than the act
is associated with a range of destructive
behaviours and mental health issues.
Susceptibility to shame is strongly
related to defensive anger and aggression.
The aggression could be physical or verbal.
It might be displaced —
directed towards individuals
unrelated to the source of the shame.
Anger is also often directed inward on the self
further compounding the problem.
In contrast, susceptibility to guilt
appears to be unrelated to anger.
Where guilt-prone individuals do feel anger
they’ve been found more likely
to handle it constructively
with non-hostile discussion and corrective action.
Shame-prone individuals are more likely
to try and deny or evade the situation
whereas guilt-prone individuals are more likely
to engage in restorative behaviour
including confessions, apologies and reparations.
Jeff Joireman found that shame was
associated with unproductive self-rumination.
Shame-prone individuals can become absorbed
in unfocussed self-critical thoughts,
resulting in more psychological distress
and less headspace for empathic reflection.
Joireman suggested that shame and rumination
feed on each other, creating
a self-reinforcing cycle.
Given all the distortions associated with shame
it’ll come as no surprise that
susceptibility to shame is strongly linked
to a range of psychological symptoms and disorders
including depression, anxiety,
PTSD, eating disorders,
substance abuse, self-harming
and suicidal behaviour.
The evidence is clear.
With its focus on a specific act
guilt serves various
psychologically adaptive functions
helping to facilitate positive resolution.
Meanwhile, with its focus
widened to the whole person
shame serves various maladaptive functions
sparking aggressive defences
that block positive resolution
and lead to destruction and disorder.
Targets of abuse often have
a susceptibility to shame
actively instilled into
them in their earliest years
through constant subjection to shaming.
This can develop into toxic or malignant shame
where the shame becomes a
more or less perpetual state
permeating the target’s thoughts,
actions and experiences.
For the shame-bound individual
the process of overcoming abuse
can feel like an assault course
because even the steps they take
towards health can inspire shame.
Of the many kinds of manipulations
abusers use on their targets
— from gaslighting to
infantilising to double binds —
shaming is one of the most pernicious.
Different abusers will inject different
strains of shame into their targets
based on their own hang-ups.
Some abusers are obsessed with
germs and dirt, neatness and order.
Some are preoccupied with body image,
sexuality, gender roles, social status.
But in all cases the
underlying message is the same:
there’s something fundamentally wrong with you.
Some abusers convey this message directly
openly telling targets they’re
worthless, rotten, degraded.
Many abusive religious
groups plump for this option
teaching targets to grovel to gods and ghosts
to forgive them for their wretchedness.
A more indirect method is to
set impossibly high standards.
Targets are often expected to
exhibit superhuman qualities
like infallibility, omniscience, telepathy.
They’re expected to know exactly what
to do and say at any given moment
and punished when they inevitably fall short.
In healthy environments, it’s understood
that each of us is born fumbling and unprepared
into a strange and bewildering world.
Mistakes are expected as a natural part
of learning to navigate that world
and seen as a source of growth.
Malignant shaming environments make
few allowances for inexperience.
Mistakes are taken as proof of innate stupidity,
thoughtlessness, or deliberate troublemaking.
Instead of growing, the target’s world shrinks.
Over time, the abuser’s message is internalised
changing from ‘there’s something
fundamentally wrong with you’
into ‘there’s something
fundamentally wrong with me’.
This is where shaming surpasses manipulations
like gaslighting and double binds.
Shaming is an abuse we’re
taught to inflict on ourselves.
Targets absorb the hypercritical
voices of their abusers
so that eventually the abusers
don’t have to say a word.
The shame-bound individual is like a fox
that’s been trained to hunt itself to exhaustion
while the hounds sit back and enjoy the show.
What’s more, the fox often
continues to hunt itself
long after the hounds have gone.
Unlike gaslighting and double binds which stop
the moment we cut our abusers out of our lives
shame can persist long after
we’ve ditched our abusers.
Even after their death.
I want to look at five persistent sources of shame
commonly reported by targets of abuse.
Many targets feel deeply ashamed
for allowing the abuse to happen.
Even in cases where they were only children
facing adult abusers with
unfathomable power and resources.
Even in cases where they acknowledge
that resistance might well’ve
led to more intense abuse.
They still blame themselves for not resisting.
In a similar vein, some targets feel ashamed
for having being part of a malignant group
—a family, a workplace, a religious sect —
in which they repeatedly witnessed the
abuse of others and took no action.
Targets sometimes feel ashamed of times
when they’ve hidden from their abusers.
Someone I’ll call Simon told me he would
secretly disconnect his family’s telephone
on certain nights of the week to avoid
phone calls from an abusive friend.
He said he was afraid his cowardice
would be discovered by his family.
Many targets feel ashamed of some
of the maladaptive coping techniques
they’ve used to try and temporarily
anaesthetise their self-loathing.
Like bingeing on drugs, food
or alcohol; self-harming;
participating in risky sexual encounters
which sometimes go much further than planned.
Because the coping technique
is in itself a source of shame
it can lead to a self-reinforcing cycle.
Shame provokes the coping technique
which in turn provokes more shame.
I want to mention one more common source of shame.
Some years ago when I was
working in a counselling charity
I saw a client I’ll call Troy who’d
written on his application form
that he’d recently been ambushed
at knife point by two muggers.
On reading those details, I assumed
he’d come to deal with trauma.
In fact he came to deal with shame.
When the muggers jumped him from
behind, flashing a knife in his face
instinctively Troy found himself fighting back
— as he put it — like a cat on drugs.
Within the space of a few seconds
one of his attackers was
immobilised with a broken leg
and the other was concussed into unconsciousness.
The emergency services were called
and Troy’s attackers were
later arrested and charged.
Despite assurances from ambulance and police staff
that he had no reason to reproach
himself for fending off his attackers
Troy became consumed with shame at
the injuries he inflicted on them.
He replayed the event endlessly
beating himself up for not
exercising more self-control.
One of the most twisted kinds of
shame instilled in targets of abuse
is the shame of sticking up for yourself.
For some targets, overcoming
these five sources of shame
begins by acknowledging them for
what they are: survival behaviours.
All of them are classic instinctive
responses to persistent threat.
We shut down. We hide. We
numb ourselves. We lash out.
How perverse is it that our
abusers throw us into survival mode
and we despise ourselves for trying to survive?
In one of my first counselling
qualification courses
one of the course leaders, a woman called Celia
conducted a counselling
session in front of the class
with a volunteer student I’ll call Harriot.
Harriot spoke openly about her shame in tolerating
violent abuse from her family
throughout her childhood.
She said she hated how weak she’d been.
Celia commented, ‘I think that
little girl was incredibly strong.’
Harriot protested, ‘How can you say that?’
Celia said, ‘Because she made
it here to tell the tale.’
In the tears that followed, a
great deal of shame was released.
People who make it out of abusive environments
sometimes kick themselves
for having tolerated things
they wouldn’t dream of tolerating now.
But we can’t blame ourselves
for knowledge and skills we didn’t have back then.
That’s the mindset of abusive shamers
who expect us to know exactly what
to do and say at any given moment.
Overcoming shame means letting go
of those impossible expectations.
I’m pleased to report that both the individuals
in the real-life cases I’ve
mentioned overcame their shame.
Troy was able to lay the ultimate responsibility
for his attackers’ injuries
where it belonged —on them.
They chose to jump a stranger in the street
and put him in fear for his life.
By creating that volatile situation, they
put not only Troy but themselves at risk.
Unfortunately for them, in
their case that risk backfired.
Simon’s case in particular
illustrates an important point.
Eventually Simon ended the friendship.
Sometime later he spoke to
his family about the abuse.
When he confessed to
disconnecting the family phone
far from judging him to be a coward
his family just wished he’d told them sooner
so he wouldn’t’ve had to
struggle with it by himself.
This highlights the
self-defeating nature of shame.
Our fear of disapproval inhibits us from testing
whether our fear of disapproval is well-founded.
Sometimes keeping shameful secrets
just insulates us from support.
When we’ve been taught to
feel persistent private shame
— to see ourselves as defective, worthless —
overcoming that mindset
means retraining our brains
unpicking the malignant
thinking habits we’ve acquired.
Part of that retraining process is learning
to recognise the alien saboteur —
the voice of our abusers that we’ve internalised
that masquerades as our own.
Instead of giving that voice
our mindless reflex agreement
we can learn to view it with
mindful critical distance
and reject any bogus sentiments;
divorce ourselves from its alien
preoccupations and hang-ups.
An idea internalised by many
targets to varying degrees
is that they bear responsibility
for everything bad that happens.
Pawel had a particularly
powerful strain of this one.
It was his girlfriend who
suggested he tried therapy.
She said he was always so hard on himself
and she wondered if he was depressed.
Pawel presented as a cheerful upbeat individual.
He joked that it was probably his girlfriend
who needed therapy for putting up with him.
I asked why his girlfriend might
think he was hard on himself.
He said she hated how he beat
himself up when things went wrong.
She was always trying to convince
him things weren’t his fault.
But Pawel said he was ‘bad luck’.
He joked that he had the ‘sadim’ touch
which my confused face prompted him to
explain was the Midas touch in reverse.
In our sessions it became clear this self-image
had been drilled into him by his parents.
From his earliest years, he
was subjected to complaints
about how much better their
lives would’ve been without him.
He was blamed for their financial struggles,
their feuds with relatives,
even their physical illnesses.
Pawel internalised the idea
he was the source of all bad
and applied it to his relationships with
other people, including his girlfriend.
He was an affliction, a Jonah.
For all his joking, it was a crushing burden.
But what was weighing Pawel down
had absolutely nothing to do with responsibility.
Pawel and I spent some time reflecting
on the concept of responsibility
and how it applied in different situations.
We started out with examples from his own life.
But he found it difficult to be objective.
His mind was powerfully geared to
hunt for reasons to blame himself
and disregard arguments in his defence.
So we looked at various hypothetical
situations involving other people.
For example, a random stranger with no training
is put in sole charge of a nuclear powerstation.
If the plant goes into meltdown,
should she be held responsible?
A museum curator is ordered at
gunpoint to open the museum vault
and hand over a valuable painting.
Should he be held responsible for the theft?
In the process of articulating his responses
to these and other imaginary examples
Pawel began to dig deep into
the concept of responsibility.
Over time, he identified a range
of factors that would affect
how an individual’s responsibility was assessed.
Factors like knowledge, skill,
autonomy, intention, power.
He recognised that where these
capacities were absent or diminished
responsibility could be reduced or nullified.
When the time felt right, I put
the following situation to him:
A couple decide to have a child.
They experience financial struggles, feuds
with relatives and physical illnesses.
How responsible is the child?
Long pause. Then a laugh.
Then a quiet declaration: ‘I wasn’t responsible.’
In subsequent sessions, Pawel
dissected many instances
of false blame heaped on him by his parents.
He began to see the sheer
perversity of their behaviour.
He recalled an old forgotten memory of a time
when his father was driving and took a wrong turn.
When Pawel pointed out the mistake
he was scolded and dismissed.
Later, when his father had to
concede he was lost, he blamed Pawel.
If the boy had made himself useful
navigating the journey by map
instead of just sitting there staring
out the window they’d never’ve got lost.
This is how it went.
His parents would shut down his contributions
then blame him for not contributing.
With little power comes little responsibility.
Pavel’s case illustrates some useful points
about overcoming misguided private shame.
As I’ve noted, the stimulus
that sparks private shame
will vary from person to person.
In Pawel’s case, random
misfortunes triggered the feeling.
But it could be anything from
experiencing sexual desire
to having critical thoughts about
a religious or political ideology
to feeling some forbidden emotion
— maybeanger or distress.
These shame responses are
unexamined, automatic, thoughtless.
A powerful antidote to an
unthinking response is thinking.
The more conscious critical thought we apply
the less misguided shame we’re likely to feel.
And Pawel’s case highlights the
importance of thinking for yourself.
My role in his sessions was not
to do all the thinking for him
but to provide a socratic dialogue —
to offer questions to assist him in his thinking.
In the building of his
thoughts about responsibility
Pawel did his own heavy lifting.
Many shame-bound individuals struggle to
judge for themselves what’s reasonable.
Is it okay to think this?
Is it okay to feel that?
In this state of doubt, there’s often a temptation
to defer to the judgements of others
to let others do the thinking for them.
The most face-smacking problem with this
is that deferring to the judgement of others
is often precisely what leads
individuals to become shame-bound.
They’ve deferred to bogus misguided judgements.
If we’re struggling to judge for ourselves
whether a thought, a feeling,
an action is acceptable
deferring to what other people find acceptable
will do nothing to enhance our judgement.
To do that, we have to develop our own thinking
to become our own Socratic questioner
interrogating our principles,
exposing our assumptions
attacking our ideas from all
angles to see if they hold up.
Then we can make our own confident
rational judgements about what’s acceptable
and let go of our private shame.
And something else will happen.
We’ll be equipped to stand
our ground against the group
— to resist public shaming.
Our experiences of public
shame are intimately bound up
with some of our most primitive
instincts around social membership.
When people are found to have gone
against the rules of their group
remarkably similar responses are seen
across human cultures around the world.
Individuals withdraw and
attempt to appease the group.
They communicate their
acceptance that their welfare
is now regarded by others as less important
and perform various nonverbal
displays of subordination
which resemble appeasement
gestures found in other primates.
They also show higher levels of cooperation.
The cross-cultural — and in some
cases cross-species — nature
of these responses points to a
deeply hardwired social mechanism.
Whatever kind of group we find ourselves born into
whether it’s an enlightened free society
or a dogmatic ideological backwater
we absorb its values and fear being
discovered transgressing them.
This is how the phenomenon of shame
feeds into the tyranny of the majority.
In families, ideological communities, nations
individuals are trained to feel defective
based not on rightness or
rationality but merely on numbers
— on what the majority happens
to consider acceptable.
The prospect of public shaming
for perceived transgressions
is what confronts people who ‘come out’
— people who reveal an aspect of themselves
that’s been unjustly
stigmatised within their group.
Often these individuals have resolved
their feelings of private shame
acknowledging within themselves that
they have no reason to feel defective.
And in the process of coming
out, they deal confidently
with attempts to humble them with public shame.
But it’s worth mentioning that for some
individuals things don’t go to plan.
In the midst of their declaration, they
find their previous confidence collapses.
They watch themselvesapologising, appeasing,
compromising and accepting inferior status.
Later, they wonder what happened.
It felt like they were taken over.
And it’s possible they were —
by the aforementioned human instinct
to submit in the face of group disapproval.
These hardwired social instincts
can have a powerful grip on us.
But if we’re consciously prepared for them
we can often keep them under control.
It’s especially easy for instinct to
take over when things get aggressive.
And in some cases that instinct is a good thing.
In recent years, some people who’ve
shared their coming out experiences
reported being physically attacked and
having dangerous objects thrown at them.
By who? Their parents.
Some tried to appease them.
Some ran out of the house.
Later on, some of them were
annoyed that they backed down.
My response is I’m glad they
made it out in one piece.
For me the pressing issue would be:
do people who provoke raw survival
instincts deserve any place in your life?
Sometimes public shaming can
take individuals by surprise.
But even though they’re unprepared for it
it can really serve to clarify things for them.
Some real-life cases.
Ruth was born into a religious community
in which the women only wore dresses.
In her twenties, tired of
this sartorial restriction
she started wearing trousers.
She knew plenty of women outside of her community
who wore them and in her mind,
it hadn’t seemed a big deal.
She was shocked to find herself
insulted and pathologised
by several members of her
family and the wider community.
Throughout his childhood,
Virgil was violently molested.
His abuser was an older cousin
who had an illness that
shortened his life expectancy.
To the rest of the family, Virgil’s
abuser was an innocent tragic figure.
And after his death in his early twenties
the family began to picture him as
a guardian angel watching over them.
They would call out for his help
and thank him when good things happened.
Eventually Virgil told his family
what their guardian angel did to him.
His revelation was met with a
silence that persisted for days.
When he pushed for some response
his mother said he’d ruined everything
and he should’ve kept it to himself.
Some weeks later, some relatives suggested
the abuse was just innocent play.
Some suggested Virgil initiated it.
He realised they were slowly bringing
their guardian angel back to life.
In her thirties, Jacqueline cut all contact
with her abusive parents and siblings
keeping in touch only with
members of the wider family.
When a much-loved uncle died,
Jacqueline attended the funeral
taking a friend for moral support.
Both of them experienced a barrage of insults
from Jacqueline’s parents and siblings
who told her she should be
ashamed to show her face.
After the funeral, they continued their abuse
following Jacqueline and her
friend back to their hotel.
Some months later, her mother died.
Jacqueline didn’t attend the funeral.
Through the wider family grapevine
she heard that her father complained
how shameful it was that
Jacqueline didn’t show her face.
But, without Jacqueline’s presence
he seemed to lose steam and soon fizzled out.
For Ruth, her community’s attempts to shame her
opened her eyes to how they
falsely moralised non-moral issues.
She had always seen the practice
of wearing dresses as a tradition.
But they elevated it to a moral law
which they tried to justify to her
with fallacious nonsense about gender and virtue.
As Ruth noted, it’s the role of traditions
to serve the people who perform them
—not the role of people to serve traditions.
And wearing dresses wasn’t serving her.
The incident brought out a side
of her family and community
she hadn’t seen before and
began an unravelling process
that eventually led to her departure.
Virgil came to realise his
family was more invested
in preserving illusions than in his welfare.
For all their lip service
about the importance of family
— about its ‘unbreakable bonds’ —
not a single individual had shown any empathy
for the pain and shame he’d
carried for so many years.
Instead they focused on
resuscitating their fantasy image
of his abuser as an innocent angel.
In contrast to his family, Virgil
didn’t try to preserve his illusions.
He realised how brittle his family was.
They couldn’t deal with reality
and the emotional mess it sometimes brought.
He recognised these weren’t people
he could look to for support.
And he drifted into appropriately distant contact.
For Jacqueline, it was no surprise
that her family criticised her
for showing her face then
for not showing her face.
It was a perfect example of the no-win
double-bind abuse she endured growing up
where the rules could be reversed
at any time to put her in the wrong.
But being attacked at her uncle’s funeral
what struck her for the first time was
how desperate for drama her family was.
Before she’d cut them out of her life
they’d always been so careful
to abuse her in private
and maintain a happy family
image to the outside world.
But the funeral was like a feeding frenzy.
They were so hungry for blood they
forgot all about their public image.
It was eye-opening.
She realised how dependent they’d
been on her as a source of drama.
It was eye-opening for many
members of the wider family too.
Some of them reached out to Jacqueline
and her relationships with
them took on a whole new life.
In families, in communities, in nations
it often takes incidents like these
—savage public displays of abusive shaming —
to wake people up to what’s going on.
When we’re confronted with
public shaming from a group
it’s easy for us to merge
everyone together in our minds
— to see them as a faceless mob.
I’ve been subjected to abusive
public shaming twice in my life
—both in my teenage years.
The first time, like Ruth, Virgil and
Jacqueline, it took me by surprise.
It was such a surreal, twilight zone experience
my overriding feeling was morbid fascination.
The second time I was prepared.
Both times, I found myself
quietly observing these people.
I took a long cold hard look at each of them.
While the behaviour of individuals who submit
to public shaming from their
group is extremely similar
behaviour from the actual group itself
often shows significant variation.
Within my community, some individuals
attacked me with genuine rage;
others attacked me with sadistic pleasure
clearly taking amusement in my abuse.
Some people ignored me with an
attitude of obvious contempt;
others ignored me with an
attitude of apologetic awkwardness
as if they just didn’t know what to say.
Some individuals would appeal to me to repent;
others would quiz me for hours, trying to find out
what had happened to me to steer me off course
—and failing to listen to a single word I said.
And in some cases, individuals would hop around
between different approaches
— threatening then guilt-tripping then pleading.
The phrase ‘can’t see the forest for the trees’
refers to situations where people
are so focused on minor details
that they fail to see the bigger picture.
But sometimes it helps to
stay focused on the trees
—to see the individuals instead of the group.
There’s no wisdom of crowds
in abusive public shaming.
Just a collection of confused, misguided
and, in some cases, sadistic individuals.
When we’ve been trained to feel malignant shame
retraining our brains can take time.
And it can help to find
good supportive communities
who reinforce healthy critical thinking habits.
But it’s worth noting that sometimes
when we think we’ve overcome our shame
and feel able to stand our ground
it can start creeping back
in subtle insidious ways.
Some people who’ve been historically shamed
by their family come to an uneasy truce.
Not wanting to lose the person
family members makes a
superficial show of acceptance
—but continue to communicate their discomfort
and disapproval in indirect ways.
The unspoken bargain is:
‘We’ll tolerate you if you don’t
talk about that part of you....’
It’s a kind of shaming by stealth.
For people who’ve struggled with shame
it‘s wise to think about
limiting the time you spend
around people who constantly
work to re-energise the idea
that there’s something
fundamentally wrong with you.
Wherever you are in your journey
—taking your first steps or
a fair way along the road —
I wish you success in overcoming malignant shame.